# BACKSATAGE Origin #

Backstage was created by Spotify as a necessity that emerged from their rapid growth and expanding collection of microservices. The team wrote an open source version and donated it to the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF), after which its values and features led to a fantastic community reception. Backstage sees itself as an aggregator of information rather than a single source of truth. It fosters autonomy and demands clear ownership. These values mean that Backstage is considered a framework, not a finished product. Your Backstage instance will be a React/Node app built on top of the core libraries whose functionality you can define by installing plugins.

The context in which Backstage was born is not unusual; perhaps your organization is in a similar situation right now. Spotify was experiencing rapid growth, onboarding new engineers every week and deploying an increasing number of microservices. At some point, the platform team realized that managing all the services was becoming increasingly complex, so they set out to create a microservices catalog. Given its success, the team integrated documentation and software templates into it.

The main challenge that Spotify’s engineering team encountered was that it was hard to tell which services were running in production and who was responsible for each of them. Their solution was to compile metadata about their services and show it in a centralized catalog, System-Z. The original metadata for each service included a link to the repository, the name of the team who owned it, and its product manager. Eventually, they started to include the service’s relationships with other services.

Once they had their metadata set up in System-Z, the team found their system had weak spots, especially when the owner of a service was an individual rather than a team. Other vulnerabilities also surfaced, which led to changes in how the organization managed microservices.

But the System-Z team didn’t stop there. They happened to also be in charge of building an internal microservices framework. The team introduced standardized endpoints to retrieve the API’s documentation. This meant that System-Z could gather together all documentation for the services it listed based on the service's introspection. System-Z rapidly became the primary reference for documentation in the organization, thanks to how it was more likely to be kept up to date living alongside the code.

As the usage of System-Z grew, the team found it was also a natural place to provide engineers with self-service infrastructure options. Additionally, tools that previously only had a CLI were extended to have a UI inside System-Z.

Spotify’s challenges are not unique. Several other organizations have tried to create internal tools that tried to solve the same problems more or less successfully. The radical innovation that Spotify provided was open sourcing its solution and donating it to the CNCF. From this point onwards, the project has evolved rapidly. Backstage is now a thriving ecosystem with community contributions and is used by more than a hundred organizations, including leading Fortune 500 companies and many scale-ups.