# Discoverability: It Only Works If It’s Automated #

Discoverability is defined by how rapidly you can find information about a service, library, tool, team, or repository. In a world where dozens—or hundreds—of development teams contribute to several codebases, use tens of development tools, and ship their services daily, it is almost impossible to know what you’re looking for in the first place. Given that Cloud native teams wrangle with different stacks and contexts, they must come up with a way of communicating with others about what they’re doing and how, as well as learn from other teams. Usually, these ways are manual compilations of resources that get pieced together in a document by somebody. The problem is not writing that document but keeping it up to date and getting everybody to know it exists.

In my experience conducting DevExp research at large organizations, I’ve encountered several strategies people adopt to navigate their ecosystems. Surprisingly, what seemed most effective was word-of-mouth: you ask a question in a Slack channel, they point you to another channel, and once there, you get a couple of referrals of people who may be able to help you, then you figure out a way to talk to them—good luck if their team is in another continent.

But why is this ad-hoc strategy the most effective? Although this process can take days or weeks, developers often perceive it as the only option given the limitations of any other existing documentation. The alternative is to try and find a document that somebody wrote last year in Atlassian, Google Docs, or Notion. But it is difficult to search across these platforms, and the hand-written architectural diagrams, API references, and other information written there are likely to be out of date when you find them.

Furthermore, let’s say you write the ultimate guide to your service API and associated libraries and commit to maintaining it regularly. But how do you tell your colleague—that you don’t even know—that you may already have created a test harness that they could just use? You can’t because you don’t know they need one and are creating their own from scratch as we speak. Discoverability is hard to achieve unless there’s a unified and reliable way to explore what is available in the organization.

Unified and reliable information at scale is only possible through automation. Quite a few companies have put together information aggregators for different needs, which has led to people using several aggregators to search for what they need. Providing automated Discoverability has become a significant enabler for improved collaboration at the organizations investing in developing an Inner Source culture.